Readme.md, before:

# Rhetos.Jobs.Abstractions and Rhetos.Jobs.Hangfire

This documentation describes installation and usage on Rhetos v5.
For documentation on older version of this plugin for **Rhetos v4**, see the previous release branch
[Readme.md](https://github.com/Rhetos/Jobs/blob/rhetos-4/Readme.md).

This repository contains two Rhetos plugin packages for asynchronous execution of background jobs:

1. **Rhetos.Jobs.Abstractions** - interfaces for asynchronous operations.
2. **Rhetos.Jobs.Hangfire** - an implementation option using Hangfire library.

Contents:

1. [Rhetos.Jobs.Abstractions](#rhetosjobsabstractions)
   1. [Asynchronously executing DSL Action in background](#asynchronously-executing-dsl-action-in-background)
   2. [Recurring jobs](#recurring-jobs)
2. [Rhetos.Jobs.Hangfire](#rhetosjobshangfire)
   1. [Installation](#installation)
   2. [Configuration](#configuration)
   3. [Recurring jobs on Hangfire](#recurring-jobs-on-hangfire)
   4. [Adding Hangfire Dashboard UI](#adding-hangfire-dashboard-ui)
   5. [Running job server in unit tests and CLI utilities](#running-job-server-in-unit-tests-and-cli-utilities)
   6. [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
      1. [ThreadAbortException](#threadabortexception)

## Rhetos.Jobs.Abstractions

Rhetos.Jobs.Abstractions provides interfaces for asynchronous operations in Rhetos applications.
This packages should be referenced in Rhetos plugins that require asynchronous execution and background processing, but to not need to depend on a *specific library* that implements this feature.
The final application should reference an *implementation package* (for example Rhetos.Jobs.Hangfire) that contains implementation of those interfaces and runs the background jobs.

This package contains:

* Interface *IBackgroundJobs* - Creates a new background job that will be executed after the current transaction is completed.
* Interface *IJobExecuter* - Implement this interface to add a custom background job type.
  * Implementation *ActionJobExecuter* - Generic job executer for background jobs that are developed as a DSL Action.

### Asynchronously executing DSL Action in background

In order to enqueue asynchronous execution of a DSL Action you have to:

* Demand from IoC container an instance of `IBackgroundJobs`.
* Create action parameters of an action you wish to enqueue for asynchronous execution.
* Call `EnqueueAction` method of `IBackgroundJobs` object. Method parameters are:
  * object action - Action which should be executed.
  * bool executeInUserContext - If true Action will be executed in context of the user which started the transaction in which Action was enqueued. Otherwise it will be executed in context of service account.
  * bool optimizeDuplicates - If true previous same Actions (same Action with same parameters) will be removed from queue.

Here is an example:

```c
Module Test
{
  Entity SomeEntity
  {
    SaveMethod
    {
      AfterSave EnqueueAsyncExecutionOfSomething
        '{
          foreach (var insertedItem in insertedNew)
          {
            var action = new Test.ProcessSomething { ItemId = insertedItem.Id };
            _backgroundJob.EnqueueAction(action, executeInUserContext: false, optimizeDuplicates: true);
          }
        }';
    }
    RepositoryUses _backgroundJob 'Rhetos.Jobs.IBackgroundJobs, Rhetos.Jobs.Abstractions';
  }
  
  Action ProcessSomething
    '(parameters, repository, userInfo) =>
    {
      // some code goes here
    }'
  {
    Guid ItemId;
  }
}
```

Enqueued actions will be executed asynchronously, immediately after the transaction in which they were enqueued is closed.
If the transaction is rolled back for any number of reasons, actions will not be enqueued and therefore not executed.

### Recurring jobs

Recurring jobs can be configured to execute DSL Action in time periods, specified by [CRON expression](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cron).

Recurring jobs can be specified in the application settings, for example in appsettings.json:

```json
{
  "Rhetos": {
    "Jobs": {
      "Recurring": {
        "RecurringJob1": {
          "CronExpression": "* * * * *",
          "Action": "SomeModule.RecurringAction1Minute"
        },
        "RecurringJob2": {
          "CronExpression": "0/2 * * * *",
          "Action": "SomeModule.RecurringAction2Minutes",
          "Queue": "default"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

The jobs from the configuration are automatically applied to Hangfire on each Rhetos **database update**, and on each **application startup**.
This can be disabled by setting to `false` configuration options `Rhetos:Jobs:UpdateRecurringJobsFromConfigurationOnDeploy`
or `Rhetos:Jobs:UpdateRecurringJobsFromConfigurationOnStartup`.

As an alternative to the application settings, the recurring jobs can be added or removed programmatically
by using `IBackgroundJobs` interface, similar to the C# example above.

## Rhetos.Jobs.Hangfire

Rhetos.Jobs.Hangfire is a plugin package for [Rhetos development platform](https://github.com/Rhetos/Rhetos).
It provides an implementation of asynchronous execution of background jobs.

### Installation

Installing this package to a Rhetos web application:

1. Add "Rhetos.Jobs.Hangfire" NuGet package, available at the [NuGet.org](https://www.nuget.org/) on-line gallery.
2. In `Startup.ConfigureServices` method, extend the Rhetos services configuration (at `services.AddRhetosHost`) with: `.AddJobsHangfire()`

If you want to run the background jobs in the **Rhetos web application**:

1. In `Startup.Configure` method, add:
   ```cs
   app.UseRhetosJobsFromConfiguration(); // Initialize recurring jobs.
   app.UseRhetosHangfireServer(); // Start background job processing.
   ```
2. If running the application on IIS, follow the instructions in section
   [Making ASP.NET Core application always running on IIS](https://docs.hangfire.io/en/latest/deployment-to-production/making-aspnet-app-always-running.html#making-asp-net-core-application-always-running-on-iis).

If you want to run the background jobs in a **separate application**, see instructions below
in section [Running job server in unit tests and CLI utilities](#running-job-server-in-unit-tests-and-cli-utilities).

### Configuration

Configuration of the plugin is done in `appsettings.json`, like in the following example (all parameters are optional).

```js
{
  "Rhetos": {
    "Jobs": {
      "Hangfire": {
        "InitializeHangfireServer": true, //If true Hangfire server will be initialized in Rhetos web application. Default value is true.
        "ProcessUserName": "hangfire-user", //UserName under which enqueued actions will be executed if action is not enqueued with executeInUserContext=true. If omitted then UserName of the account of the app pool user will be used.
        "Queues": ["default"], //Array of queue names which will be processed by this instance of Hangfire server. Default is '["default"]'.
        "CommandBatchMaxTimeout": 300, //Value is in seconds. Default value is 300. For usage of the option see Hangfire documentation.
        "SlidingInvisibilityTimeout": 300, //Value is in seconds. Default value is 300. For usage of the option see Hangfire documentation.
        "QueuePollInterval": 0, //Value is in seconds. Default value is 0. For usage of the option see Hangfire documentation.
        "UseRecommendedIsolationLevel": true, //Default value is true. For usage of the option see Hangfire documentation.
        "DisableGlobalLocks": true, //Default value is true. For usage of the option see Hangfire documentation.
        "WorkerCount": 2, //Default value is 2. For usage of the option see Hangfire documentation.
        "ShutdownTimeout": 15, //Value is in seconds. Default value is 15. For usage of the option see Hangfire documentation.
        "StopTimeout": 0, //Value is in seconds. Default value is 0. For usage of the option see Hangfire documentation.
        "SchedulePollingInterval": 15, //Value is in seconds. Default value is 15. For usage of the option see Hangfire documentation.
        "HeartbeatInterval": 30, //Value is in seconds. Default value is 30. For usage of the option see Hangfire documentation.
        "ServerTimeout": 300, //Value is in seconds. Default value is 300. For usage of the option see Hangfire documentation.
        "ServerCheckInterval": 300, //Value is in seconds. Default value is 300. For usage of the option see Hangfire documentation.
        "CancellationCheckInterval": 5 //Value is in seconds. Default value is 5. For usage of the option see Hangfire documentation.
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Recurring jobs on Hangfire

Hangfire 1.7 uses [NCrontab](https://github.com/atifaziz/NCrontab/blob/master/README.md) implementation or CRON expressions.

Time period shorter then a minute (mostly for testing purposes) might cause issues and require additional setup,
see [Hangfire recurring tasks under minute](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/38367398/hangfire-recurring-tasks-under-minute).

### Adding Hangfire Dashboard UI

See "Adding Dashboard UI" in Hangfire documentation:
<https://docs.hangfire.io/en/latest/getting-started/aspnet-core-applications.html#adding-dashboard-ui>

### Running job server in unit tests and CLI utilities

You can create a separate application to run the background jobs,
for example a Windows service or a CLI utility,
instead of running them directly in the Rhetos web application.
These utility applications will use Rhetos app's context and configuration
when executing the jobs.

Creating a "job runner" utility for your project:

1. Create the "job runner" console application and add a project reference to your Rhetos application.
2. Add the following text in the csproj file to suppress Rhetos build tasks in the job runner:
   ```xml
   <PropertyGroup>
     <RhetosBuild>false</RhetosBuild>
     <RhetosDeploy>false</RhetosDeploy>
   </PropertyGroup>
   ```
3. Copy the content of `Program` class from demo JobRunner app: [Program.cs](https://github.com/Rhetos/Jobs/blob/master/Tools/JobRunner/Program.cs).

Remarks:

* CreateHangfireJobServer supports parameter for configuring Hangfire.BackgroundJobServerOptions.
  The options are initialized from app settings (see RhetosJobHangfireOptions), and can be modified
  by this delegate.
* As an alternative to `rhetosJobServerFactory.CreateHangfireJobServer`, you can create and configure Hangfire.BackgroundJobServer
  directly, without automatically reading BackgroundJobServerOptions from app settings.
* You can test the job runner utility with a LINQPad script that creates the jobs,
  for example see [AddJob.linq](https://github.com/Rhetos/Jobs/blob/master/test/TestApp/LinqPad/AddJob.linq).

### Troubleshooting

#### ThreadAbortException

*ThreadAbortException* can occur on application shutdown if there are some Hangfire background jobs still running.
Review the Hangfire documentation:
For console apps and Windows services, make sure to [Dispose BackgroundJobServer](https://docs.hangfire.io/en/latest/background-processing/processing-background-jobs.html) before exiting the application.
For web applications, reduce the issue with [Making ASP.NET application always running](https://docs.hangfire.io/en/latest/deployment-to-production/making-aspnet-app-always-running.html).

Commit message:

Updated release notes, build and installation instructions.

Readme.md, after:

# Rhetos.Jobs.Abstractions and Rhetos.Jobs.Hangfire

This documentation describes installation and usage on Rhetos v5.
For documentation on older version of this plugin for **Rhetos v4**, see the previous release branch
[Readme.md](https://github.com/Rhetos/Jobs/blob/rhetos-4/Readme.md).

This repository contains two Rhetos plugin packages for asynchronous execution of background jobs:

1. **Rhetos.Jobs.Abstractions** - interfaces for asynchronous operations.
2. **Rhetos.Jobs.Hangfire** - an implementation option using Hangfire library.

Contents:

1. [Rhetos.Jobs.Abstractions](#rhetosjobsabstractions)
   1. [Asynchronously executing DSL Action in background](#asynchronously-executing-dsl-action-in-background)
   2. [Recurring jobs](#recurring-jobs)
2. [Rhetos.Jobs.Hangfire](#rhetosjobshangfire)
   1. [Installation](#installation)
   2. [Configuration](#configuration)
   3. [Recurring jobs on Hangfire](#recurring-jobs-on-hangfire)
   4. [Adding Hangfire Dashboard UI](#adding-hangfire-dashboard-ui)
   5. [Running job server in unit tests and CLI utilities](#running-job-server-in-unit-tests-and-cli-utilities)
   6. [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
      1. [ThreadAbortException](#threadabortexception)
3. [How to contribute](#how-to-contribute)
   1. [Building and testing the source code](#building-and-testing-the-source-code)

## Rhetos.Jobs.Abstractions

Rhetos.Jobs.Abstractions provides interfaces for asynchronous operations in Rhetos applications.
This packages should be referenced in Rhetos plugins that require asynchronous execution and background processing, but to not need to depend on a *specific library* that implements this feature.
The final application should reference an *implementation package* (for example Rhetos.Jobs.Hangfire) that contains implementation of those interfaces and runs the background jobs.

This package contains:

* Interface *IBackgroundJobs* - Creates a new background job that will be executed after the current transaction is completed.
* Interface *IJobExecuter* - Implement this interface to add a custom background job type.
  * Implementation *ActionJobExecuter* - Generic job executer for background jobs that are developed as a DSL Action.

### Asynchronously executing DSL Action in background

In order to enqueue asynchronous execution of a DSL Action you have to:

* Demand from IoC container an instance of `IBackgroundJobs`.
* Create action parameters of an action you wish to enqueue for asynchronous execution.
* Call `EnqueueAction` method of `IBackgroundJobs` object. Method parameters are:
  * object action - Action which should be executed.
  * bool executeInUserContext - If true Action will be executed in context of the user which started the transaction in which Action was enqueued. Otherwise it will be executed in context of service account.
  * bool optimizeDuplicates - If true previous same Actions (same Action with same parameters) will be removed from queue.

Here is an example:

```c
Module Test
{
  Entity SomeEntity
  {
    SaveMethod
    {
      AfterSave EnqueueAsyncExecutionOfSomething
        '{
          foreach (var insertedItem in insertedNew)
          {
            var action = new Test.ProcessSomething { ItemId = insertedItem.Id };
            _backgroundJob.EnqueueAction(action, executeInUserContext: false, optimizeDuplicates: true);
          }
        }';
    }
    RepositoryUses _backgroundJob 'Rhetos.Jobs.IBackgroundJobs, Rhetos.Jobs.Abstractions';
  }
  
  Action ProcessSomething
    '(parameters, repository, userInfo) =>
    {
      // some code goes here
    }'
  {
    Guid ItemId;
  }
}
```

Enqueued actions will be executed asynchronously, immediately after the transaction in which they were enqueued is closed.
If the transaction is rolled back for any number of reasons, actions will not be enqueued and therefore not executed.

### Recurring jobs

Recurring jobs can be configured to execute DSL Action in time periods, specified by [CRON expression](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cron).

Recurring jobs can be specified in the application settings, for example in appsettings.json:

```json
{
  "Rhetos": {
    "Jobs": {
      "Recurring": {
        "RecurringJob1": {
          "CronExpression": "* * * * *",
          "Action": "SomeModule.RecurringAction1Minute"
        },
        "RecurringJob2": {
          "CronExpression": "0/2 * * * *",
          "Action": "SomeModule.RecurringAction2Minutes",
          "Queue": "default"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

The jobs from the configuration are automatically applied to Hangfire on each Rhetos **database update**, and on each **application startup**.
This can be disabled by setting to `false` configuration options `Rhetos:Jobs:UpdateRecurringJobsFromConfigurationOnDeploy`
or `Rhetos:Jobs:UpdateRecurringJobsFromConfigurationOnStartup`.

As an alternative to the application settings, the recurring jobs can be added or removed programmatically
by using `IBackgroundJobs` interface, similar to the C# example above.

## Rhetos.Jobs.Hangfire

Rhetos.Jobs.Hangfire is a plugin package for [Rhetos development platform](https://github.com/Rhetos/Rhetos).
It provides an implementation of asynchronous execution of background jobs.

### Installation

Installing this package to a Rhetos application:

1. Add "Rhetos.Jobs.Hangfire" NuGet package, available at the [NuGet.org](https://www.nuget.org/) on-line gallery.
2. In `Startup.ConfigureServices` method, extend the Rhetos services configuration (at `services.AddRhetosHost`) with: `.AddJobsHangfire()`

If you want to run the background jobs in the **Rhetos web application**:

1. In `Startup.Configure` method, add:
   ```cs
   app.UseRhetosJobsFromConfiguration(); // Initialize recurring jobs.
   app.UseRhetosHangfireServer(); // Start background job processing.
   ```
2. If running the application on IIS, follow the instructions in section
   [Making ASP.NET Core application always running on IIS](https://docs.hangfire.io/en/latest/deployment-to-production/making-aspnet-app-always-running.html#making-asp-net-core-application-always-running-on-iis).

If you want to run the background jobs in a **separate application**, see instructions below
in section [Running job server in unit tests and CLI utilities](#running-job-server-in-unit-tests-and-cli-utilities).

### Configuration

Configuration of the plugin is done in `appsettings.json`, like in the following example (all parameters are optional).

```js
{
  "Rhetos": {
    "Jobs": {
      "Hangfire": {
        "InitializeHangfireServer": true, //If true Hangfire server will be initialized in Rhetos web application. Default value is true.
        "ProcessUserName": "hangfire-user", //UserName under which enqueued actions will be executed if action is not enqueued with executeInUserContext=true. If omitted then UserName of the account of the app pool user will be used.
        "Queues": ["default"], //Array of queue names which will be processed by this instance of Hangfire server. Default is '["default"]'.
        "CommandBatchMaxTimeout": 300, //Value is in seconds. Default value is 300. For usage of the option see Hangfire documentation.
        "SlidingInvisibilityTimeout": 300, //Value is in seconds. Default value is 300. For usage of the option see Hangfire documentation.
        "QueuePollInterval": 0, //Value is in seconds. Default value is 0. For usage of the option see Hangfire documentation.
        "UseRecommendedIsolationLevel": true, //Default value is true. For usage of the option see Hangfire documentation.
        "DisableGlobalLocks": true, //Default value is true. For usage of the option see Hangfire documentation.
        "WorkerCount": 2, //Default value is 2. For usage of the option see Hangfire documentation.
        "ShutdownTimeout": 15, //Value is in seconds. Default value is 15. For usage of the option see Hangfire documentation.
        "StopTimeout": 0, //Value is in seconds. Default value is 0. For usage of the option see Hangfire documentation.
        "SchedulePollingInterval": 15, //Value is in seconds. Default value is 15. For usage of the option see Hangfire documentation.
        "HeartbeatInterval": 30, //Value is in seconds. Default value is 30. For usage of the option see Hangfire documentation.
        "ServerTimeout": 300, //Value is in seconds. Default value is 300. For usage of the option see Hangfire documentation.
        "ServerCheckInterval": 300, //Value is in seconds. Default value is 300. For usage of the option see Hangfire documentation.
        "CancellationCheckInterval": 5 //Value is in seconds. Default value is 5. For usage of the option see Hangfire documentation.
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Recurring jobs on Hangfire

Hangfire 1.7 uses [NCrontab](https://github.com/atifaziz/NCrontab/blob/master/README.md) implementation or CRON expressions.

Time period shorter then a minute (mostly for testing purposes) might cause issues and require additional setup,
see [Hangfire recurring tasks under minute](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/38367398/hangfire-recurring-tasks-under-minute).

### Adding Hangfire Dashboard UI

See "Adding Dashboard UI" in Hangfire documentation:
<https://docs.hangfire.io/en/latest/getting-started/aspnet-core-applications.html#adding-dashboard-ui>

### Running job server in unit tests and CLI utilities

You can create a separate application to run the background jobs,
for example a Windows service or a CLI utility,
instead of running them directly in the Rhetos web application.
These utility applications will use Rhetos app's context and configuration
when executing the jobs.

Creating a "job runner" utility for your project:

1. Create the "job runner" console application and add a project reference to your Rhetos application.
2. Add the following text in the csproj file to suppress Rhetos build tasks in the job runner:
   ```xml
   <PropertyGroup>
     <RhetosBuild>false</RhetosBuild>
     <RhetosDeploy>false</RhetosDeploy>
   </PropertyGroup>
   ```
3. Copy the content of `Program` class from demo JobRunner app: [Program.cs](https://github.com/Rhetos/Jobs/blob/master/Tools/JobRunner/Program.cs).

Remarks:

* CreateHangfireJobServer supports parameter for configuring Hangfire.BackgroundJobServerOptions.
  The options are initialized from app settings (see RhetosJobHangfireOptions), and can be modified
  by this delegate.
* As an alternative to `rhetosJobServerFactory.CreateHangfireJobServer`, you can create and configure Hangfire.BackgroundJobServer
  directly, without automatically reading BackgroundJobServerOptions from app settings.
* You can test the job runner utility with a LINQPad script that creates the jobs,
  for example see [AddJob.linq](https://github.com/Rhetos/Jobs/blob/master/test/TestApp/LinqPad/AddJob.linq).

### Troubleshooting

#### ThreadAbortException

*ThreadAbortException* can occur on application shutdown if there are some Hangfire background jobs still running.
Review the Hangfire documentation:
For console apps and Windows services, make sure to [Dispose BackgroundJobServer](https://docs.hangfire.io/en/latest/background-processing/processing-background-jobs.html) before exiting the application.
For web applications, reduce the issue with [Making ASP.NET application always running](https://docs.hangfire.io/en/latest/deployment-to-production/making-aspnet-app-always-running.html).

## How to contribute

Contributions are very welcome. The easiest way is to fork this repo, and then
make a pull request from your fork. The first time you make a pull request, you
may be asked to sign a Contributor Agreement.
For more info see [How to Contribute](https://github.com/Rhetos/Rhetos/wiki/How-to-Contribute) on Rhetos wiki.

### Building and testing the source code

* Note: This package is already available at the [NuGet.org](https://www.nuget.org/) online gallery.
  You don't need to build it from source in order to use it in your application.
* To build the package from source, run `Clean.bat`, `Build.bat` and `Test.bat`.
* For the test script to work, you need to create an empty database and
  a settings file `test\TestApp\ConnectionString.local.json`
  with the database connection string (configuration key "ConnectionStrings:RhetosConnectionString").
* The build output is a NuGet package in the "Install" subfolder.
